Add Data Studios Kubernetes configuration docs (#83)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-24.1.0/enterprise/data-studios.mdx

---
title: "Data Studios deployment"
description: Deploy Seqera Platform with Data studios
date: "12 Jun 2024"
tags: [docker, compose, kubernetes, data, studios, deployment]
---

You can enable Data Studios as part of your Seqera Platform instance.

## DNS configuration

Each data studio is reachable at a unique URL, which includes a randomly generated subdomain name. For example, a data studio URL can be: `https://abcd.example.com/`, where `example.com` is your Seqera base domain name.

> To allow for uniquely generated third level domains, you must provide a wildcard TLS certificate. A wildcard certificate is one where the common name includes `*.` in the domain name, such as `*.example.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow for uniquely generated third-level domains, you must provide a wildcard TLS certificate. A wildcard certificate is one where the common name includes `*.` in the domain name, such as `*.example.com`.
```

### Procedure

1. Download the Kubernetes manifests for the Data Studios service:

    - [Ingress](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/ingress.aks.yml)
    - [Proxy config](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/proxy-config.yml)
    - [Proxy](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/proxy.yml)
    - [Server](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/server.yml)

1. Edit the `server.yml` file and set the `REDIS_ADDRESS` environment variable to the host name or IP address of the Redis server that you configured for Platform.

1. Edit the `proxy.yml` file and set the following variables:

    - `REDIS_SERVER`: Specify the host name or IP address of the Redis server that you configure for Platform.
    - `TOWER_CONNECT_DOMAIN`: Specify a base domain name for the connect proxy subdomain. For example, if you specify `example.com` then `connect.example.com` is the fully qualified domain name for the proxy.
    - `TOWER_BASE_URL`: Specifies the base URL for your Platform installation, such as `https://tower.example.com/`.

1. Change your Kubernetes context to the one where your Platform instance runs:

    ```
    kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=<namespace>
    ```

> 1. Create a Secret that contains the initial access token. Any alphanumeric value is allowed.

Reviewer 2: Should we add this secret as a manifest yml file to the k8s/data_studios folder?
Like here: https://github.com/seqeralabs/platform-deployment/commit/8ce70cbcd01209457f2067baf819026a0cc732a3#diff-80e015aef215d53b4b9fc79eafc2d1b7fa65cecb9e6aaf91e726a34e143352b5

Author: @endre-seqera, we could, but for Platform K8s install we just have it directly in the docs. I think that approach is more accessible, since the secret is only a few lines.

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Secret
    type: Opaque
    metadata:
      name: connect-proxy-secret
      namespace: connect-stage
    stringData:

>       INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN: <INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN>

Reviewer 2: Changed variable name from to INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN to OIDC_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_TOKEN, for better understanding

---
title: "Data Studios deployment"
description: Deploy Seqera Platform with Data studios
date: "12 Jun 2024"
tags: [docker, compose, kubernetes, data, studios, deployment]
---

You can enable Data Studios as part of your Seqera Platform instance.

## DNS configuration

Each data studio is reachable at a unique URL, which includes a randomly generated subdomain name. For example, a data studio URL can be: `https://abcd.example.com/`, where `example.com` is your Seqera base domain name.

To allow for uniquely generated third-level domains, you must provide a wildcard TLS certificate. A wildcard certificate is one where the common name includes `*.` in the domain name, such as `*.example.com`.

Data Studios uses the following set of domains and subdomains:

- The domain that you set for `TOWER_SERVER_URL`, such as `example.com`.
- A wildcard subdomain that you must configure specifically for Data Studios. This wildcard subdomain is the parent for each unique data studios session URL, such as `abcd.example.com`.

> - The connection proxy, defined by `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`. This URL is used internally and by convention is `connect.example.com`. This domain must be a subdomain of your Platform, so you cannot use `connect.example.net` if your Platform domain is `example.com`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The connection proxy, defined by `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`. This URL is used internally and by convention is `connect.example.com`. This domain must be a subdomain of your Platform domain, so you cannot use `connect.example.net` if your Platform domain is `example.com`.
```

:::note

> We recommend using only a third-level domain to minimize additional costs that you might incur from additional nesting of subdomains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend using only a third-level domain to minimize the costs of additional nesting of subdomains.
```

    ```shell
    openssl genrsa -out private.pem 2048
    openssl rsa -pubout -in private.pem -out public.pem
    ```

1. Open the `docker-compose.yml`, and uncomment the volume mount for the PEM key file for the `backend` service in the `volumes` list. Your PEM file must be named `data-studios-rsa.pem`.

    ```yaml
    volumes:
      - $PWD/tower.yml:/tower.yml
      # Data studios RSA key is required for the data studios functionality. Uncomment the line below to mount the key.
      #- $PWD/data-studios-rsa.pem:/data-studios-rsa.pem
    ```

1. Open `data-studios.env` in an editor, and make the following changes:
   1. Uncomment the `connect-proxy` and `connect-server` services.
   1. Set the following environment variables:
      - `PLATFORM_URL`: Specify the same value assigned to `TOWER_SERVER_URL`.
      - `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`: Specify a base domain name for the connect proxy subdomain. For example, if you specify `example.com` then `connect.example.com` is the fully qualified domain name for the proxy.

>       - `CONNECT_OIDC_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_TOKEN`: Specify the base64-encoded value that you captured in the `client_token` environment variable.

Author: @llewellyn-sl, I wasn't sure how best to handle this -- do we even need a variable? To answer self, no. I used lowercase because someone might mistake it for a relevant variable, there are so many here. Or maybe I can just say paste the value from the terminal that you got from the previous step? I just want someone to put that value in here in some intuitive way.

1. Generate an RSA public/private key pair. A key size of at least 2048 bits is recommended. In the following example, the `openssl` command is used to generate the key pair:

    ```shell
      openssl genrsa -out private.pem 2048
      openssl rsa -pubout -in private.pem -out public.pem
    ```

1. Apply a base64 encoding to the PEM file that you created in the previous step:

    ```
    base64_pem=$(cat public.pem | base64)
    ```

1. Create a Secret file named `secret.yml`, and set the `oidc.pem` key to the value of the base64-encoded public/private key pair:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Secret
    metadata:
      name: platform-oidc-certs
      namespace: platform-stage
    data:
      oidc.pem: <BASE64_ENCODED_PEM_FILE>
    ```

1. Create the Secret:

    ```
    kubectl apply -f secret.yml
    ```

1. Edit the `tower-cron.yml` file and uncomment the `volumes.cert-volume`, `volumeMounts.cert-volume`, and `env.TOWER_OIDC_PEM_PATH` fields so that the public/private key pair is available to Platform.

1. Apply the configuration change to Platform:

    ```
    kubectl apply -f tower-cron.yml
    ```

> 1. Edit the ConfigMap named `platform-backend-cfg` in the `configmap.yml` for Platform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Edit the ConfigMap named `platform-backend-cfg` in the `configmap.yml` for Platform by adding the following environment variables:
```

>     -  Add the following environment variables:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>        - `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_CONNECT_URL`: Specifies the URL of the Data Studios connect proxy, such as `https://connect.tower.example.com/`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_CONNECT_URL`: The URL of the Data Studios connect proxy, such as `https://connect.tower.example.com/`.
```

>        - `TOWER_OIDC_REGISTRATION_INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN`: Use the same base64-encoded access token that you specified in the Secret named `connect-proxy-secret`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       - `TOWER_OIDC_REGISTRATION_INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN`: The same base64-encoded access token specified in the Secret named `connect-proxy-secret`.
```

>     - If you want to restrict Data Studios to specific organization workspaces, list each workspace ID in the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To restrict Data Studios to specific organization workspaces, provide a comma-separated list of workspace IDs in the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES` environment variable.
```

>     - If you want to allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, do not include the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, do not set the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`.
```

Same comment as before RE confirming env var behavior.

> 1. Optional: If you want to allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, edit the ConfigMap named `tower-yml` in the `configmap.yml` and include the following stanza with your existing configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Optional: To allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, edit the ConfigMap named `tower-yml` in the `configmap.yml` and include the following snippet:
```

    ```yaml
    data:
      tower.yml: |-
        tower:
          data-studio:
            allowed-workspaces: null
    ```

> 1. Apply the updated configuration: `kubectl apply -f configmap.yml`

Reviewer 3: For consistency with other instructions, please split the command to a new line (GH editor is not understanding this in suggestion mode)

1. Apply the Data Studios manifests:

    ```
    kubectl apply -f ingress.aks.yml proxy.yml server.yml
    ```

    It can take several minutes for Kubernetes to apply your changes, during which new pods are rolled out.

> 1. To confirm that Data Studios is available, log in to your Platform instance and navigate to a organizational workspace for which Data Studios is enabled. The **Data Studios** tab is included with the available tabs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. To confirm that Data Studios is available, log in to your Platform instance and navigate to an organizational workspace that has Data Studios enabled. The **Data Studios** tab is included with the available tabs.
```

Data Studios uses the following set of domains and subdomains:

- The domain that you set for `TOWER_SERVER_URL`, such as `example.com`.
- A wildcard subdomain that you must configure specifically for Data Studios. This wildcard subdomain is the parent for each unique data studios session URL, such as `abcd.example.com`.
- The connection proxy, defined by `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`. This URL is used internally and by convention is `connect.example.com`. This domain must be a subdomain of your Platform domain, so you cannot use `connect.example.net` if your Platform domain is `example.com`.

:::note
We recommend using only a third-level domain to minimize the costs of additional nesting of subdomains.
:::

## Data Studios workspace availability

You can configure which organizational workspaces have access Data Studios. This configuration is set in the `tower.yml` file. The `tower.data-studio.allowed-workspaces` field supports the following options:

- `allowed-workspaces: []`: Disables Data Studios. This is the default if the `allowed-workspaces` field is not specified.

> - `allowed-workspaces: [ <WORKSPACE_ID>, <WORKSPACE_ID> ]`: Enables Data Studios for the comma separated list of organizational workspace IDs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `allowed-workspaces: [ <WORKSPACE_ID>,<WORKSPACE_ID> ]`: Enables Data Studios for the comma-separated list of organizational workspace IDs.
```

### Procedure

1. Download the Data Studios [environment configuration file](./_templates/docker/data-studios.env).

1. Create an initial access token:

    ```
    client_token=$(openssl rand -base64 32 | tr -d /=+ | cut -c -32)
    ```

1. Generate an RSA public/private key pair. A key size of at least 2048 bits is recommended. In the following example, the `openssl` command is used to generate the key pair:

    ```shell
    openssl genrsa -out private.pem 2048
    openssl rsa -pubout -in private.pem -out public.pem
    ```

1. Open the `docker-compose.yml` and uncomment the volume mount for the PEM key file for the `backend` service in the `volumes` list. Your PEM file must be named `data-studios-rsa.pem`.

    ```yaml
    volumes:
      - $PWD/tower.yml:/tower.yml
      # Data studios RSA key is required for the data studios functionality. Uncomment the line below to mount the key.
      #- $PWD/data-studios-rsa.pem:/data-studios-rsa.pem
    ```

1. Open `data-studios.env` in an editor, and make the following changes:
   1. Uncomment the `connect-proxy` and `connect-server` services.
   1. Set the following environment variables:

>       - `PLATFORM_URL`: Specify the same value assigned to `TOWER_SERVER_URL`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - `PLATFORM_URL`: The same value assigned to `TOWER_SERVER_URL`.
```

>       - `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`: Specify a base domain name for the connect proxy subdomain. For example, if you specify the base domain `example.com` then `connect.example.com` is the fully qualified domain name for the proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`: A base domain name for the connect proxy subdomain. For example, if you specify the base domain `example.com` then `connect.example.com` is the fully qualified domain name for the proxy.
```

>       - `CONNECT_OIDC_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_TOKEN`: Specify the same base64-encoded value set in the `client_token` environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - `CONNECT_OIDC_CLIENT_REGISTRATION_TOKEN`: The same base64-encoded value set in the `client_token` environment variable.
```

    - [Proxy](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/proxy.yml)
    - [Server](./_templates/k8s/data_studios/server.yml)

1. Change your Kubernetes context to the namespace where your Platform instance runs:

    ```
    kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=<namespace>
    ```

1. Create an initial access token:

    ```
    client_token=$(openssl rand -base64 32 | tr -d /=+ | cut -c -32)
    ```

1. Edit the `ingress.yml` and set the following values:

    - `alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/certificate-arn` annotation:
    - `alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-attributes` annotation:
    - `spec.rules.host` field:

1. Edit the `server.yml` file and set the `CONNECT_REDIS_ADDRESS` environment variable to the hostname or IP address of the Redis server configured for Platform.

1. Edit the `proxy.yml` file and set the following variables:

    - `CONNECT_REDIS_ADDRESS`: The hostname or IP address of the Redis server configured for Platform.
    - `CONNECT_PROXY_URL`: A base domain name for the connect proxy subdomain. For example, if you specify the base domain `example.com` then `connect.example.com` is the fully qualified domain name for the proxy.

>     - `PLATFORM_URL`: The base URL for your Platform installation, such as `https://tower.example.com/`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `PLATFORM_URL`: The base URL for your Platform installation, such as `https://example.com/`.
```

tags: [docker, compose, kubernetes, data, studios, deployment]
---

You can enable Data Studios as part of your Seqera Platform instance.

## DNS configuration

Each data studio is reachable at a unique URL, which includes a randomly generated subdomain name. For example, a data studio URL can be: `https://abcd.example.com/`, where `example.com` is your Seqera base domain name.

To allow for uniquely generated third level domains, you must provide a wildcard TLS certificate. A wildcard certificate is one where the common name includes `*.` in the domain name, such as `*.example.com`.

The proxy domain (`CONNECT_PROXY_URL`) has to be a subdomain of main platform domain (example: if the platform domain is

> `tower.io`, then the proxy domain should be `example.tower.io`).

Reviewer 4: Please align your examples by sticking with a single common domain. You've got two different domain examples in two successive paragraphs.

Author: @gwright99, yep, this isn't complete, as you've gathered. This is still a combination of the original PR's content I didn't write and my best interpretive rewrite of what it might become, still incomplete.

1. Open the `docker-compose.yml`, and uncomment the volume mount for the PEM key file for the `backend` service in the `volumes` list:

    ```yaml
        volumes:
          - $PWD/tower.yml:/tower.yml
          # Data studios RSA key is required for the data studios functionality. Uncomment the line below to mount the key.

>           #- $PWD/data-studios-rsa.pem:/data-studios-rsa.pem

Reviewer 4: Add example command to create.

Author: @gwright99, I'd like to, yes; What command do you recommend to create the RSA key? Thanks!

      INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN: <INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN>
    ```

1. Edit the ConfigMap named `platform-backend-cfg` in the `configmap.yml` for Platform.
    -  Add the following environment variables:

       - `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_CONNECT_URL`

>        - `TOWER_OIDC_REGISTRATION_INITIAL_ACCESS_TOKEN`: Use the same access token that you specified in the previous step

Reviewer 4: You mean actual string value or reference to the Secret created above?

>        - `TOWER_OIDC_PEM_PATH`

Reviewer 4: Value?

Author: @gwright99, going to shameless copy these from the environment variable YAML, but those all need to be confirmed as completed descriptions.

    - If you want to restrict Data Studios to specific organization workspaces, list each workspace ID in the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`.
    - If you want to allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, do not include the `TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`.

> 1. Optional: If you want to allow access to Data Studios in every organizational workspace, edit the ConfigMap named `tower-yml` in the `configmap.yml` and include the following stanza with your existing configuration:

Reviewer 4: Guidance on why they should choose one option over the other re: TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES?

Reviewer 5: The platform interpret the value of the configuration as:
- `null`: all enabled
- empty list: all disabled
- list of values: enable the listed values

Due to the limitations of environment variables the first case `null` cannot be specified, so the yaml file is needed, users are not forced to use env variables for the other two cases:

All disabled:
```
tower:
  data-studio:
     allowed-workspaces: []
```

Enable only some workspaces:
```
tower:
  data-studio:
     allowed-workspaces: [ 12321, 231231]
```

The advantage of the env variable is that is shorter, but maybe the two alternatives ways that we are forced to use are confusing.

Author: @t0randr, having several approaches where only one way covers all cases is a bit confusing.

Author: @justinegeffen @llewellyn-sl 

I'm strongly tempted to just omit the environment variable for this entirely as it provides only a subset of the functionality, and it makes the procedure complex and bifurcated. Customers are probably already using `tower.yml` anyway for site-specific configuration, so it won't be a new thing.

    ```yaml
    data:
      tower.yml: |-
        tower:
          data-studio:
            allowed-workspaces: null
    ```

1. Apply the updated configuration: `kubectl apply -f configmap.yml`
1. Apply the Data Studios manifests:

    ```

>     kubectl apply -f ingress.aks.yml proxy-config.yml proxy.yml server.yml

Reviewer 4: why `aks`?

Author: @gwright99, this seems to be K8s provider specific, and this one appears to be for AWS, the only supported public cloud Data Studios platform today.

    volumes:

>       - $PWD/data-studios-rsa.pem:/data-studios-rsa.pem

Reviewer 4: Parking? aka TBD?

Author: @gwright99, I wasn't ready to delete the original content that was merged in regards to the Docker Compose installation approach, but this entire section will go away.
